Right now that we've covered for loops while loops variables and arrays we're going to see how we can
build a little bit of interaction between the user and the server.
There's two main ways of doing that get variables and post variables and we're going to start in this
video looking at GET variables and there'll be a fairly chunky challenge at the end as well.
So you may have seen it get variables before essentially they're encoded in the U R L itself.
So for example if I wanted to put a GET variable of name I'd do it like this.
So you may have seen things like this on web sites before.
It's a question mark and then you have the name of the variable which in this case is name equals and
then the value of the variable.
And if you want to have two variables you separate them with.
And so let's say my password is equal to 1 2 3 4 for some horrendous reason and we might have a third
one of gender is male or something like that.
So that's how you put GET variables into the u r l string.
Now if I load the page like that you can see for the moment it looks exactly the same.
So these GET variables are passed to the script.
But obviously if you're not doing anything with them it doesn't affect the website at all.
So how do we access these variables then within our script.
It's actually really easy.
They are all contained in an array called Dola underscore get.
That's it.
So if we wanted to display the contents of that away array we'd use print underscore or for human readable
and then the get array.
So now let's have a look.
OK.
So you can see we've got a name is Raub password 1 2 3 4.
And gender is male and of course if you want to get any of those particular variables then you would
just find it in the normal way.
So you access the get array and then choose which one you want.
So gender for example that will display that particular value.
All right.
So we know now how to access some variables from our browser in our server script.
How do we get them there in the first place.
Well one way would be to have a link which contained those values in them but a more common way is to
use a form.
And this is not the first time that we're going to be using a form with server side processing which
is pretty cool.
So let's create a little form.
We'll have a very simple question.
What's your name.
And then we'll create our form and the usual way.
Notice I'm doing all my team outside of my ph P script then.
So it's not going to break my Ph.
And then we'll have an input with the name of name and a type of text
and then we'll have our submit button input with a type of Submit and the valley quolls.
Let's have a go.
And that's it.
So now I'll get rid of genda.
Let's see what happens.
So first off I'm going to get rid of all of these variables because we don't need them anymore.
And then when we load that we'll see the form.
There it is.
Notice we've got an empty array because there are no get variables at the top there.
But if I now put rope into the form and click go you can see that it's put immediately at the top there.
So if we wanted to say hello to whoever the user is we might do something like
Hi there.
Then we access the get array and the name
and then potpie exclamation mark on the end.
Let's get rid of the print to avoid any confusion and then let's pretend I'm someone else.
I'm We.
Hi there.
Caston excellent.
So this is some genuine interaction that we're getting now between the user and the server script.
So we're going to use that in a fairly big challenge which will also use some loops and if statements
and we're going to make a very simple page called is it prime.
If you've done one of my app development courses you will have done this before so it should be pretty
straightforward but you won't have done it in HP before.
So first off a prime number if you don't remember from school is a number that has no factors other
than 1 and itself.
So for example 5 is prime because no number goes into it other than 1 and 5 6 is not prime because 2
and 3 go into it.
So what we want to do is we want to use it to be able to enter any number into the box and for HP to
process that number and tell us whether or not it is prime.
Simple as that you might need to do a little bit of paper and pen preparation for this one just to think
through the problem because it's a little bit more subtle than we're used to.
And you'll also need to find a way of working out whether a number goes into another number or not.
And I'm sure you'll be able to do that with a quick Google.
So best of luck if you go
all rights.
Have you managed it.
Let's give it a shot.
Say let's change a paragraph to say Please enter a whole number and then we'll change the name of our
input to number and then we'll leave the submit as it is and just to check that everything is connected
up right.
Let's display the get array
that we got so at the moment its name is Keston because that's what was there before.
But if I put in five we should get number is five.
Excellent.
So now the tricky bit.
Let's have an if statement at the start.
Which checks to see if we've got an array there at all.
And there's a nice easy way to do that.
We can just look at the value of Dala underscore get.
And if it has any contents then it will run this.
If not then it went and what we need then is a loop which goes from 2 up to our number to test whether
or not each of those numbers goes into our number and if we don't get any then it must be prime.
If we do get some then it's not prime so I'm going to use a while loop because I generally prefer while
loops.
You could do it just as well with a for loop.
So let's start with I.
Is equal to 2.
Notice I don't start one because one goes into every number.
So that would be silly.
So I'm starting with two.
And then let's set up how loop.
So we'll keep going as long as I get less than our number which we get from our get array
like that.
Remember we don't want to keep going until it actually equals our number because if I equals the number
it will definitely divide into it because three divides into three or five divides into five.
So that doesn't count.
We need to go up to but not including our number that we go.
And then don't forget the increment to come out.
All right.
Now at this point we need to check whether I divide into our number or not.
That's the thing we don't have to do.
So let's do a google.
Start with PH P and then check if number divides another number something like that.
Checking if a number is divisible by 6.
That's quite specific but it should give us the answer that we need.
And there we go.
Aha so there's a thing called the modulus operator which gives the remainder of the division.
So if we use number percent 6 then if it goes exactly it will equal zero or if it doesn't then it won't.
So that's perfect.
OK.
So let's use that if
our number
percent I is equal to zero.
So remember that means if the remainder when our number is divided by is equal to zero.
So if that is true then that means that the number is not prime and then just the double slash there
it's exactly the same as JavaScript.
That's our way of leaving a comment in our code.
So it's not prime because the remainder when we divide it by eye is zero.
So it must go exactly.
Now we don't need an else there because just because it doesn't divide it doesn't mean that it is prime
necessarily.
It has to be not divided by all the numbers for it to be prime.
So the way I'm going to deal with that is I'm going to have a variable called is prime.
And initially we'll set that to true and then if we get a number that divides into it then all set is
prime to false.
There we go.
So that makes sense.
Feel free to go back and listen to the explanation again.
If you weren't entirely clear because it's quite subtle but essentially we're going from two all the
way up to one less than a number.
And we're checking with each of those numbers divides into our number and if they do then we're setting
is prime to false.
All right.
So once we've done that is prime will either be true or false.
So we can check to see if is prime and we could do that take with it you could try but it's slightly
more elegant to just look at its prime because is prime is a boolean.
It's either true or false itself anyway.
So we don't need to check whether it's equal to or explicitly then we'll say
put a paragraph tag and I is a prime number
and if it's not
well citing
it's not prime
prime numbers.
By the way very important in computing and particularly in the web and in payment systems.
Believe it or not our whole payment system is built on the fact that finding big prime numbers is hard.
So if you found a solution that predicts prime numbers it would be very rich indeed and you would be
able to break all online security.
Fortunately no one's done that yet.
OK.
So let's have a look.
I'm going to put in six.
So it says six is not prime.
That's promising.
Nine Nine is not prime.
Excellent.
Well that seven seven is a prime number.
So it looks like it's working correctly beryllium.
Now what if I'm a bit cheeky and I put in one like that.
Aha interesting.
So got a bit of a bug there and if we don't put in a nice positive integer then we get this strange
effect that too is a prime number.
So why is it doing that.
Well remember we're initially setting equal to 2.
And then we're keeping going as long as I have less than the number.
But if we check that is less than and then a string o n e then that's never going to be true.
So it doesn't do this at all and it just avoids this loop completely and I is too down here and is prime
is true.
So we end up with two is a prime number which may be true but it's not quite what the user was asking.
So let's do a check to see first off that the user enters a number and that's something that we didn't
have to do.
So let's check each pay check if string is numeric
we can find out with a number or variable is a number.
When you Meric and for once we're not on stack overflow actually although it's fairly slow to load so
I might say Stack Overflow is faster.
This is HP dot net which is the really Handyside will come back to it and that shows you the kind of
official definitions of each function within HP.
But it's a little bit slower than the stack overflow today.
So we've got C type underscored digit.
It's a little bit of a vague answer that one.
This one looks closer to what we want so if is underscored numeric value and we're actually checking
to see whether it's positive and we're even on this on such checking to see if it's a whole number.
And we're doing that by checking whether the value is equal to the value when it's rounded to 0 or decimal
places.
So actually that's a lot more than I wanted to check but it will certainly suffice for us.
So let's
pop that in let's say we want to replace value with gets number.
So we're checking first off if number is numeric then we're checking that number is positive.
And then we're checking if the number is a whole number.
OK.
So they should be more or less all the checks that we need just back to HP dot net now that it's loaded.
This is a really handy site.
I particularly like the examples here.
I make it really clear how each function works.
OK.
So back to us if we now say that and do our search for one.
Again OK.
So it's done the check and it hasn't returned anything.
So that's good.
We've not got a mistake here.
Although I realize I've misspelled number that but it will be good to give an error message.
So as a final little addition or tweak to make code a little bit nicer I'm going to add an else and
within my else I'm going to check to see if
they've submitted anything.
So if we get to here that means user has submitted something which is not a positive
number.
So at this point we should say
Please enter a positive whole number
and that's just a bit more elegant than not giving a message at all.
Except I forgot to do something.
Yeah.
So them.
There we go.
So now we've got a nice error please enter a positive whole number.
And if we did that with seventy six point two three four is where we should get the same message.
But if we go back to a whole number it will tell us whether it's prime or not.
Brilliant.
So that was a fairly tricky programming challenge.
As always I hope you manage to do at least part of it yourself.
And now we're experts with one way to communicate between the user and the server.
That is get variables we're then going to look in the next video at post variables which is actually
a more powerful way to communicate between the user and the server.